         SCIENCE
    TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS X




Reprint 2026-27
1064 – SCIENCE
                                                                                         ISBN 81-7450-636-5
Textbook for Class X


First Edition
                                                                                      ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
December 2006 Agrahayana 1928
                                                          q    No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
Reprinted                                                      transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
November 2007, January 2009,                                   recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.

December 2009, November 2010,                             q    This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent,
                                                               re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
January 2012, November 2012,                                   form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
October 2013, December 2014,                              q    The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
December 2015, February 2017,                                  price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
                                                               and should be unacceptable.
January 2018, January 2019,
August 2019, January 2021 and
November 2021                                                 OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
                                                              DIVISION, NCERT
Revised Edition                                               NCERT Campus
October 2022, Kartika 1944                                    Sri Aurobindo Marg
                                                              New Delhi 110 016                                    Phone : 011-26562708

Reprinted                                                     108, 100 Feet Road
                                                              Hosdakere Halli Extension
March 2024 Chaitra 1946                                       Banashankari III Stage
                                                              Bengaluru 560 085                                    Phone : 080-26725740
June 2024 Jyeshtha 1946
December 2024 Pausha 1946
                                                              Navjivan Trust Building
January 2026 Magha 1947                                       P.O.Navjivan
                                                              Ahmedabad 380 014                                    Phone : 079-27541446

PD 345T SM                                                    CWC Campus
                                                              Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
                                                              Panihati
© National Council of Educational                             Kolkata 700 114                                      Phone : 033-25530454

Research and Training, 2006, 2022                             CWC Complex
                                                              Maligaon
                                                              Guwahati 781 021                                     Phone : 0361-2674869




                                                        Publication Team
` 160.00
                                                        Head, Publication                              : M.V. Srinivasan
                                                        Division

                                                        Chief Editor                                   : Bijnan Sutar

                                                        Chief Business                                 : Amitabh Kumar
                                                        Manager

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT                      Chief Production                               : Deepak Jaiswal
watermark                                               Officer (In charge)
Published at the Publication Division by                Production Officer                             : Sunil Sharma
the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Sri                              Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and                                     Digital Expressions
printed at Laxmi Offset Printers, G- 114-115,
Heerawala Industrial A rea, Kanota, Agra
Road, Jaipur




                                                Reprint 2026-27
      F O R E W O R D

The National Curriculum Framework, (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education
(1986).
     The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative
activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children
generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key
reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning,
not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
     These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
     The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development team responsible for this book. We
wish to thank the Chairman of the advisory group in science and mathematics, Professor
J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Rupamanjari Ghosh, School
of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, for guiding the work of
this committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we
are grateful to them and their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to
the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon
their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of




                                     Reprint 2026-27
the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairmanship
of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions
which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.


                                                                              Director
New Delhi                                              National Council of Educational
20 November 2006                                                Research and Training




                                        (iv)




                                     Reprint 2026-27
               RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK

In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into
consideration in this exercise.

Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:

•   Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
    same class
•   Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•   Difficulty level
•   Content, which is easily accessible to students without much
    interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through
    self-learning or peer-learning
•   Content, which is irrelevant in the present context


This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.




                                Reprint 2026-27
Reprint 2026-27
     P R E F A C E

This textbook of Science for Class X is a continuation of our attempt in the Class IX
Science textbook to comply with the guidelines of the National Curriculum
Framework-2005. We had to work within a limited time frame and also had our own
constraints coming in the way of this radical change. The revised and re-structured
syllabus for Class X covers selected topics in the broad themes of — Materials,
The World of the Living, How Things Work, Natural Phenomena and Natural Resources.
We have interpreted the syllabus to present a coherent coverage of scientific concepts
related to our daily life on the select topics. It is an integrated approach to science at
this level, with no sharp divisions into disciplines such as Physics, Chemistry, Biology
and Environmental Science.
    There has been a conscious attempt to address the relevant social concerns in this
science textbook wherever possible — the concerns for people with special needs, the
issues of gender discrimination, energy and environment have found their natural
place in this book. Students have been encouraged to get into the debates on some of
the management concerns (for sustainable development, for example) so that they
can arrive at their own decisions after a scientific analysis of all the facts.
    This book has some features which are meant to enhance its effectiveness. The
theme of each chapter has been introduced with examples from daily life, and if possible,
by a relevant activity that the students have to perform. The entire approach of the
book is, in fact, activity-based, i.e., the students are required to construct knowledge
themselves from these activities. The emphasis is not on definitions and technical
terms, but on the concepts involved. Special care has been taken so that the rigour of
science is not lost while simplifying the language. Difficult and challenging ideas,
which are not to be covered at this stage, have often been placed as extra material in
the boxes in light orange. The excitement of doing science comes from pursuing the
unknown — the students would have the opportunity to think and explore somewhat
beyond the syllabus and may feel the urge to continue their scientific expedition at
higher levels. All such box items, including brief biography of scientists, are, of course,
non-evaluative.
    Solved examples are provided, wherever felt necessary, to clarify a concept. The
in-text questions after a main section are for the students to check their understanding
of the topic. At the end of each chapter, there is a quick review of the important points
covered in the chapter. We have introduced some multiple choice questions in the
exercises. There are problems of different difficulty levels answers to the multiple-
choice questions and numericals, and hints for the difficult questions are included at
the end of the book.




                                    Reprint 2026-27
    This book has been made possible because of the active participation of many
people. I wish to thank Professor Krishna Kumar, Director, NCERT, Prof. G. Ravindra,
Joint Director, NCERT, and Professor Hukum Singh, Head, Department of Education
in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, specially for their keen interest in the development
of the book and for all the administrative support. I wish to put on record my sincere
appreciation for Dr Anjni Koul, the member-coordinator of the textbook development
committee, for her extraordinary commitment and efficiency. It has been a real pleasure
working with my textbook development team and the review committee. The chosen
editorial team worked extremely hard, on tight deadlines, to bring the book close to
the shape that we dreamt of. Fruitful discussions with some members of the MHRD
Monitoring Committee helped in providing the final touches to the book. I do not have
the words to acknowledge the professional and personal inputs I received from some
of my close friends during the preparation of this book. We warmly welcome comments
and suggestions for improvement from our readers.


                                                                   RUPAMANJARI GHOSH
                                                                 Professor of Physics
                                                          School of Physical Sciences
                                                         Jawaharlal Nehru University
                                                                           New Delhi




                                         (viii)




                                       Reprint 2026-27
   TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRMAN, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and
Astrophysics (IUCAA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University, Pune

CHIEF ADVISOR
Rupamanjari Ghosh, Professor, School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi

MEMBERS
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Animesh K. Mohapatra, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer
B.B. Swain, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics, Utkal University, Orissa
B.K. Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Brahm Parkash, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Charu Maini, PGT, Salwan Public School, Gurgaon, Haryana
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.L. Satheesh, TGT , DM School, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore
Ishwant Kaur, PGT, DM School, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
J.D. Arora, Reader, Hindu College, Moradabad, Uttar Pradesh
Meenambika Menon, TGT, Cambridge School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
Puran Chand, Professor and Jt. Director (Retd.), Central Institute of Educational Technology
NCERT, New Delhi
Reeta Sharma, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
R.P. Singh, Lecturer, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Satyajit Rath, Scientist, National Institute of Immunology, JNU Campus, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar
Sunita Ramrakhiani, PGT, Ahlcon Public School, Delhi
Uma Sudhir, Eklavya, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
Vandana Saxena, TGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya-4, Kandhar Lines, Delhi Cantt., New Delhi
Vinod Kumar, Reader, Hans Raj College, Delhi University, Delhi

MEMBER- COORDINATOR
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi

                                            (ix)




                                      Reprint 2026-27
    A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), besides expressing
its gratefulness towards the members of the Textbook Development Committee for their
contribution in the development of the Science Textbook for Class X, also acknowledges
the contribution of the following members for reviewing, editing, refining, and finalisation
of the manuscript of the book. Kanhiya Lal, Principal (Retd.), Directorate of Education,
NCT, Delhi; Ranveer Singh, Lecturer, Sarvodaya Bal Vidyalaya, Timarpur, Delhi; Bharat
Poorey, Professor (Retd.), Govt. Post Graduate College, Indore; Gagandeep Bajaj, Lecturer,
S.P.M. College, Delhi University, Delhi; Ravinder Kaur, TGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Rohini,
Delhi; Renu Puri, TGT, N.C. Jindal Public School, New Delhi; Sarita Kumar, Reader,
Acharya Narendra Dev College, Delhi University, Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Lecturer, DESM,
NCERT, Delhi; Rashmi Sharma, Lecturer, NERIE, Shillong; Sushma Jaireth, Reader, DWS,
NCERT, New Delhi; Y.P. Purang, Addl. Director of Education (Retd.), NCT, Delhi; Neeta
Agarwal, TGT, D.L.D.A.V. Model School, Pitampura, Delhi; Roma Anand, TGT, D.L.D.A.V.,
Pitampura, Delhi; Veer Pal Singh, Reader, DEME, NCERT, New Delhi and S.L. Varte,
Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi.
     The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of Sunita Farkya (Professor,
DESM), Pushplata Verma (Assistant Professor, DESM), K.C. Tripathi (Professor, DEL)
and Jatindra Mohan Misra (Professor, DEL) in updating Chapter 16 titled "Sustainable
Management of Natural Resources", and also in the review of this textbook.
     The contribution of R.S. Sindhu, Professor (Retd.), DESM; V.P. Srivastava, Professor
(Retd.), DESM; R.K. Parashar, Rachna Garg (Professors, DESM); V.V. Anand, Professor
(Retd.), RIE Mysore; S.V. Sharma (Professor, RIE Mysore); V.P. Singh (Professor, RIE Ajmer);
R. Joshi, Associate Professor (Retd.), DESM; C.V. Shimray, Ruchi Verma (Associate
Professors, DESM); Ram Babu Pareek (Associate Professor, RIE Ajmer); A.K. Srivastava,
Rejaul Karim Barbhuiya, Pramila Tanwar (Assistant Professors, DESM); R.R. Koireng
(Assistant Professor, DCS); V. Tangpu (Assistant Professor, RIE Mysore) and Akhileshwar
Mishra (Head Master, DMS, RIE Bhubaneswar), in the review of this textbook in 2017-18
are acknowledged.
     Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and Former Head, DESM, NCERT,
New Delhi, for providing all academic and administrative support.
     The Council also gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the APC Office of
DESM, administrative staff of DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station, DESM;
Saima and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators and Rajesh Handa, Illustrator;
Mohd. Qamar Tabrez and Musarrat Parveen, Copy Editors; Seema Yadav, Proof Reader.
The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT are also highly appreciated.




                                             (x)




                                         Reprint 2026-27
  CONTENTS




                                                                 CONTENTS
   Foreword                                                iii
   Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks              v
   Preface                                                 vii

Chapter 1     Chemical Reactions and Equations              1

Chapter 2     Acids, Bases and Salts                      17

Chapter 3     Metals and Non-metals                       37

Chapter 4     Carbon and its Compounds                    58

Chapter 5     Life Processes                              79

Chapter 6     Control and Coordination                   100

Chapter 7     How do Organisms Reproduce?                113

Chapter 8     Heredity                                   128

Chapter 9     Light – Reflection and Refraction          134

Chapter 10    The Human Eye and the Colourful World      161

Chapter 11    Electricity                                171

Chapter 12    Magnetic Effects of Electric Current       195

Chapter 13    Our Environment                            208

              Answers                                 218-219




                                         (xi)




                                   Reprint 2026-27
        THE CONSTITUTION OF
               INDIA
                        PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
1
  [SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure
to all its citizens :
     JUSTICE,               social,         economic              and
     political;
      LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief,
      faith and worship;
      EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
      and to promote among them all
      FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of
      the individual and the 2[unity and
      integrity of the Nation];
   IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
1.   Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
     for "Sovereign Democratic Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
2.   Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
     for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)




                                  (xii)




                               Reprint 2026-27
